# DataVisualizationn his acclaimed The Lost Museum: The Nazi Conspiracy to Steal the World’s Greatest Works of Art, the Puerto Rican journalist Hector Feliciano articulates that “Plundered art is like the Loch Ness Monster. Everyone talks about it for a while, then forgets about it until the next sighting.” Although the Nazi confiscations of such high-value pieces as Leonardo da Vinci’s Mona Lisa and Gustav Klimt’s Portrait of Adele Bloch-Bauer I managed to consistently generate media hysteria, the impression prevails that Feliciano’s observation is rooted in a sense of truth, as over half of the artworks claimed by the Nazi expropriation program has remained lost or stolen since the conclusion of the Second World War in 1945.

According to the results of a recent analysis conducted by the Art Loss Register, approximately 200,000 works of art fell victim to Nazi theft yet fewer than 95,000 have since been successfully recovered, repatriated, and returned to their rightful owners. Roughly 100,000 of these pieces were looted in France alone, and only 45,000 have been correctly restored. However, these works still continue to resurface on an intermittent basis. For example, in February 2018, the Louvre opened two spaces displaying 31 recently discovered paintings which had been lost to Nazi theft in a noble attempt to restore the stolen pieces to their rightful heirs. Already boasting a formidable collection of 1,752 similarly looted works, the Louvre has long been recognized as a continental leader in fostering efforts at recovery – although this exhibition marks the first in which the gallery has dedicated a full space to works seized by the Nazis since the conclusion of the war in 1945. The cultural, legal, and socio-political nuances of ownership titles which remain unresolved have been both contentious and well-documented, leading to the establishment of such restitution initiatives as ‘The Monument Men, Munich Artworks Discovery’ (1992), and ‘The Holocaust Expropriation Act of Recovery’ passed by the American congress in 2016. The latter initiative specifically concentrates its efforts towards providing the victims of Holocaust-era persecution, and their heirs, with fair opportunities to recover works of art that had been unjustly seized or misappropriated by the Nazis during the wartime period.

However, the inescapable fact remains that the current whereabouts of over half of the artworks which fell victim to Nazi looting continue to elude discovery, including such famed and illustrious pieces as Jan Van Eyck’s The Just Judgesfrom the Ghent Altarpiece, and Raphael’s Portrait of a Young Man– confiscated by the totalitarian state in 1934 and 1939 respectively. In fact, the latter painting even holds the dubious honour of having been confiscated by the Gestapo with the specific purpose of decorating Hitler’s Berlin residence. Rejected by the Vienna Academy of Fine Arts, the Führer was once an aspiring artist himself, and his aesthetic beliefs manifest themselves in the Aryanism at the core of the Nazi ideology. Advocating a return to the idealized forms and landscapes of the classical tradition, Hitler favored the works of the ‘Old Masters’ – as demonstrated through his specific motivations behind instructing the Gestapo expropriation of Portrait of a Young Man. In contrast, he loathed the primitivist qualities present throughout art nouveau, and vehemently condemned the Impressionist, German Expressionist, Fauve, Cubist, Dada, and Surrealist movements as examples of “Degenerate Art,” or “Entartete Kunst.”

Rising to cultural prominence in Paris during the late 19th Century, the Impressionists, led by the indomitable figure of Claude Monet, proved undeniably controversial in artistic circles at the time; and often receive recognition as the first so-called purveyors of art nouveau. Rudely abandoning the formal traditions of academic painting, such as the sketching of lines and contours, in favour of light, unblended colors and short brush strokes, it is perhaps unsurprising that the Impressionists not only incurred condemnation from the Academy, but also from the Nazi regime. Having established their aesthetic ideals, the Nazi regime then systematically proceeded to mercilessly plunder the artistic landscape of continental Europe; and the economic and artistic ramifications of their unprecedented expropriation program would continue to reverberate across European markets throughout the following years of the post-war era (1945 – 1985).

This data visualization focuses its scope upon the stolen works created by the popular Impressionists Cézanne, Gaugin, Monet, Pissarro, and Sisley; and boasts a simple interactive element of displaying the average hammer price for each artist – and the distribution of auction houses through which each artist’s works were sold upon their market re-emergence – once the user hovers over the artist’s specific bar.

https://benjaminroith.github.io/DataVisualization/

[744]

